---
layout: post
description: "Starting to budget is not just starting a new practice. Its a new mindset"
title: "New Begginings"
author: brian
---

I have never had a budget in my life. I have always worked to live, and I have considered each and every paycheck to be a giant discretionary fund. Throw in a "everyone needs credit" mentality into the mix, and you have a powder keg of debt waiting to explode. I definitely need a budget, and for the first time in my life I am taking steps towards that goal.

##Why I need a budget (and you might too)

At the ripe old age of 28, I have had a fairly successful career in software engineering. If we are looking at salary alone, by all accounts my family and I should be just fine. However, I have learned a few tricks to making my income work against me.

Credit cards, a mortgage, a mounting pile of online subscriptions, and a "spend first, never ask questions later" mentality have given my family several televisions, 2 playstations, an xbox, and absolutely no hope of retirement.

Increased salary has never addressed the problem, and I have a feeling this is the case for a lot of people.

##Getting started

Whenever I want to learn something new in the realm of software, I find an expert, grab a book, and start applying the principles. Budgeting seemed like it could operate on the same level. My good friend and co-blogger Jason pointed me towards Dave Ramsey and his [Total Money Makeover](http://www.amazon.com/Total-Money-Makeover-Classic-Financial/dp/1595555277/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1411090654&sr=1-1&keywords=total+money+makeover) book.

There is a lot of practical advice in this book, and reading it has been a catalyst for action and has given me a general interest in the practice of budgeting and setting financial goals. 

### The envelope system
This is one idea that I was a little skeptical of at first. I live and breath in a digital world, so the concept of **physical** money in a **physical** envelope felt unnatural to me. Lesson learned. 

My wife Jennie and I have been setting down the budget together and have been filling the following envelopes with a fixed amount of cash: grocery, baby, clothing, hospitality, date night, and discretionary. Once the envelope is depleted, that is it. No more reaching for the credit card and no pulling from savings; we just have to deal with it.

The side effects of this simple practice are amazing. It has allowed us to have an **ACTUAL** plan.  It is teaching us patience and consideration for the things we spend our money on. We are allowing ourselves just 30 dollars each for discretionary funds, and making that last for an entire paycheck has caused a total shift in thinking.

I haven't entirely convinced that **physical** is the best method, and this new system has certainly given me some fun brainstorming sessions on how technology might *simplify* this process - thinking in the vein of services like [Mint](https://www.mint.com/?cid=ppc_gg_b_stan_403-5273031-13814&utm_medium=cpc&utm_source=google&utm_campaign=SBUS__Brand%20Mint%20Core%2FGXUS__Brand%20Mint%20Core&utm_keyword=mint&KID=42f4d685-53c9-9228-2a0b-00002a2f8a54&gclid=CjwKEAjwheqgBRD5vOfR45az5AESJABy4m8-NB88k-OY-Y1MG9dehKfFH7Etu7R09MW5eMPPdMrEnRoCmL3w_wcB), but maybe with an easier touch.

### The emergency fund
After recently purchasing a home, I was amazed at how quickly Jennie and I were able to return to a "paycheck-to-paycheck" lifestyle. By using the envelope system and having a plan, we have been able to rebuild an emergency fund. It took a few paychecks after starting, but we have been able to set aside $1000 for a rainy day.

The goal behind this is to reduce the temptation to reach for those credit cards and have a small cushion to cover any unexpected financial burdens that can (and will) show up.

Maybe I am being too honest here, but 3 paychecks to actually have a small savings was fast for us. It is a good feeling to feel like we are gaining a little control over our finances and see that we are capable of meeting goals.

##The Future
The envelope system is getting easier, and meeting the emergency fund goal has empowered us to set more goals. We have recently laid out all of our debt and have started on steps to pay that all down. Debt free sounds good.

I've been discussing a lot of these things with Jason, and together we have enjoyed discussing how to make these things easier, more interesting, and more rewarding. We are interested in exploring how to make budgeting and financial goals easier - both for ourselves and from a technology perspective.

This blog is incentive for me to be transparent about my financial struggles and successes, and is also a good way to catalog ideas and methods with a like minded friend. I'm looking forward to improving in this realm, and hopefully helping and gaining incite from others who are on this path.