---
layout: post
description: "This article focuses on employing functional composition to perform the common task of saving data"
title: "On Values"
author: brian
tags:
- software
- development
---

A little over a month ago, Robert C. Martin published an article on the 8th light blog titled [Extreme Programming, a Reflection](http://blog.8thlight.com/uncle-bob/2013/12/10/Thankyou-Kent.html). It's an interesting article that outlines how Extreme Programming (XP) changed the software world forever. After reading the article I was amazed by how many of my programming habits, ideas, and beliefs have been informed by XP. The joke of course being that I had never actually read Kent Beck's book.

Values
------
As Kent puts it, values bring purpose to practices. XP embraces five values to guide development.

###Communication###
Problems can arise from a lack of communication. The lack of communication can be between developers, between a client and the developers, between the client and the organization, etc.. I don't know about you, but I don't care for operating in complete ignorance. It's no fun completing something only to find out it's not what the client asked for. Why spin on a problem for several days when your neighbor has always known the answer?

As I grow, I am forced to realize that I don't know everything. Communication is a valuable asset when it is used to inform others of what you don't know. Chances are someone else does know, and your admission can lead to personal learning and team success.

The value of communication is one reason I am against one person shows. Some work environments put some kind of odd value on a person's ability to do work by themselves *all of the time*. I've rarely seen these single person shows be a resounding success, and being alone deprives us of one of our most basic needs as humans to be social.

> Communication is important for creating a sense of team and effective cooperation.

###Simplicity###
I think there is a tendency for many developers, myself included, to overthink things. There is an odd desire to try to cover every situation or problem that could arise (guilty). We may even go so far as to complicate a problem so we can satisfy some itch to employ a recently learned pattern or tool (guilty). Maybe we want some grand solution that we can later open source for street creds (guilty).

Wherever our drive for extra complexity is coming from, we need to cool it. XP encourages us to ask ourselves "What is the simplest thing that could possibly work?" Naturally that question places a special emphasis on **that could possibly work**. Communication complements simplicity by eliminating unecessary requirements and helping us focus on *today's problem*.

###Feedback###
The amount, quality, and frequency of feedback seems to be an overlooked value - at least in my experience. We understand the benefit of stand-ups, but not fully. They are rarely daily, and there is a tendency to focus on "where are we at on this feature" instead of "how is development going, and how can we improve?" We need feedback often and as quickly as possible, and we need time to respond to that feedback.

Once again, our values are tied to one another. Feedback is a good litmus test for simplicity. Simple things are easy to give feedback on, and receiving feedback allows us the opportunity to simplify things. Naturally communication between team members facilitates good feedback.

When we look at practices, we can see how test driven development and automated tests are great feedback mechanisms.

> The sooner you know, the sooner you can adapt.

###Courage###
Courage allows us to act in the face of fear. I've seen inaction as a result of a developer fearing for their job. I've seen brilliant people stay silent for fear of ridicule. It's become a regular practice to overestimate for fear of consequences on an unmet estimate.

Hopefully you work for a company that doesn't fire you for first time mistakes. Hopefully your team doesn't belittle you for not understanding something, and hopefully estimates are truly estimates and not promises. Whatever your circumstances, if fear keeps you from acting in the best interests of your team, then our lack of courage becomes counterproductive.

Once again this value works in concert with the others: communicate honestly, encourage simplification of the complex, and give feedback - even when it hurts.

> The courage to speak truths, pleasant or unpleasant, fosters communication and trust. The courage to discard failing solutions and seek new ones encourages simplicity. The courage to seek real, concrete answers creates feedback.

###Respect###
For some reason, many developers place value on the amount of esoteric knowledge someone has. The reality is, a team is full of people making varying kinds of contributions - that is real flesh and blood humans who wish to bring value to the project.

Everyone involved in a project has value as a person, and software succeeds when team members respect one another, and respect the project. I like to think respect fosters education and growth. Respect means no backstabbing or gossip, and it means a willingness to acknowledge gifts and foster understanding where it might be lacking.

Things won't get done if people don't care about eachother or the project.

Team Values
-----------
These five values are straight forward, but I believe they would make a huge impact if embraced. Values aren't just prescribed by a book and left for teams and individuals to follow blindly. We are free to choose our own values, but as XP puts it:

> What is most important is aligning team behavior to team values.

If I can take one thing away from reading up on these values, it is the emphasis on aligning team behavior to team values. It is the emphasis on whole team that makes XP so appealing to me. Imagine what can be accomplished when a group of passionate people act based on shared values.
